# Plot of the ORFold output


The output table generated by ORFold can be subsequently given to ORFold 
to generate a plot of the HCA score distribution. 
The user can provide several tables in order to compare different HCA score
distributions. In this case, ORFplot will plot all the distributions on the same plot
(the tables must be given with the **-tab** option). 

The HCA score distribution of a set 
of globular proteins extracted from [1] is represented by the grey histogram. 
We defined three sequence categories according to their HCA scores: low, intermediate and high HCA score
sequences. The boundaries of these categories are defined so that 95% of the globular proteins 
fall into the intermediate HCA score bin. Dotted black lines delineate the 
boundaries of each category. 

Each plotted distribution is compared with the one of the globular 
proteins set with a Kolmogorov Smirnov test. 
Asterisks on the plot denote level of significance: * < 0.05, \*\* < 0.01, \*\*\* < 0.001.
By default, the names used in the legend of the resulting plot 
are the root names of the input table files. 
However, the user can write his own names in the legend 
with the **-names** option. The names must be given in the same order 
as the table files. 

	
```{bash}
orfplot -tab sequences_Y.tab sequences_X.tab sequences_Z.tab
```

This example will generate the HCA score distributions of the sequences 
stored in the sequences_Y.tab, sequences_X.tab and sequences_Z.tab files. 
The resulting legend will be sequences_Y, sequences_X, and sequences_Z respectively. 

	orfplot -tab sequences_Y.tab sequences_X.tab sequences_Z.tab -names Noncoding Coding Translated

This example will generate the HCA score distributions of the sequences 
stored in the sequences_Y.tab, sequences_X.tab and sequences_Z.tab files.
The resulting legend will be "Noncoding", "Coding" and "Translated", respectively.

<div class="admonition note">
    <p class="first admonition-title">
        Note
    </p>
    <p class="last">
        If the names consist of single words the user can write them the 
one after the other as shown in the example above. However, if the user 
wishes to use multiple words in the legend labels (ie Noncoding sequences - 
Homo sapiens , Coding sequences - Homo sapiens, Translated sequences - 
Homo sapiens) they must be enclosed in double quotes. 
```{}
	orfplot -tab sequences_Y.tab sequences_X.tab sequences_Z.tab -names "Noncoding sequences - Homo sapiens" "Coding sequences - Homo sapiens" "Translated sequences - Homo sapiens"
```
    </p>
</div>


References

1. 	Mészáros B, Erdős G, Dosztányi Z (2018) IUPred2A: context-dependent prediction of protein disorder as a function of redox state and protein binding. Nucleic acids research 46:W329–W337